---
title: Finding my workflow
description: How I found what works for me.
date: 2020-12-17
tags:
  - writing
  - organization
  - interactive fiction
layout: layouts/post.njk
---
I think the biggest thing I learned this month is finding a workflow that works for me. At first I tried a more freeform approach where I just wrote and let the words guide me. I know people for who this approach works wonders. For me, I just ended up with a paragraph of the story. Then my mind would just freeze with too many endless possibilities. My motivation waned as I had no clear direction. Many a unfinished stories buried in folders scattered across my laptop.

The next approach was to plan everything out, down to the littlest detail. A good friend of mine basically writes a wiki for each of her stories. Including information like what the seasons are like, and her stories always feel rich and grounded. I found this approach was also overwhelming. I was spending all my time writing outlines until I got burnt out and just abandoned it.

So then I decided to find a middle ground. I tried making a general overall outline, so I know the main story points and direction and then wrote to those points. Adjusting when needed as the story took a more definite shape. This sorta worked. I actually finished something with this, which was my entry for advXjam, which you can play [here](https://snophysh.itch.io/to-the-sea-again). But I still felt resistance to this method.

Then I happened upon [this post](https://twitter.com/lizardengland/status/1336701828508114948) talking about game design documentation. This was a much more visual approach, explicitly using [Xmind](https://www.xmind.net/), but I feel any flow chart software will do. In essence, it's mapping out the flow and structure before you even begin writing. I started experimenting with this, and things just clicked. I realized what I was missing in the other approaches was the visual aspect. Which makes sense as I'm a very visual learner.

Once I have mapped things out in Xmind, I still wanted to document the lore, characters, and overall themes laid out based on my flow chart. A friend suggested [World Anvil](https://www.worldanvil.com/), so I gave it a shot but found it overwhelming quickly. Although it's an excellent site for those who really like to map out all those little details.

So instead, I just opened up a markdown editor(I use [typora](https://typora.io/)) and wrote a simple outline based on the flow chart to flesh out some areas. Once that was done, I got to writing, and the words just flowed. Like my mind finally had the energy to write now that I wasn't trying to produce prose, structure, and continuity all at once.

Another significant difference with this approach and why I used a markdown editor instead of google docs is that I'm much more productive and less distracted when I'm not working in the browser. When I have my browser open, I'm so tempted to go on social media or a youtube rabbit hole. When I'm using Xmind or my markdown editor, I close everything else on my laptop and just focus on the task at hand. For some reason, that extra friction of having to open the browser helps curb distractions.

I'm sure I'll refine this approach more as I learn my craft and have more projects under my belt, but for now, this feels like an excellent workflow for me.
